so last time
we finished by proving
bolzano's intermediate value theorem
which states that a continuous function
achieves all values in between
the function evaluated at the endpoints
so
if i have a continuous function
and either
i take a value y between f of a and f of
b so either f of a is less than f of b
and y's in between
is bigger than f of a and less than f of
b
or
f of a is bigger than f of b but
y is still in between them
then there exists
c in the interval a b
so that
f c equals y alright so every value in
between f
evaluated at the endpoints
is achieved i drew the picture then
along with this
a b
f a
f b
and
that could be
the function and if we take anything
in between
then there has to be
some c
so that f of c
equals y okay at least in the picture
i've drawn there's three different guys
but there's always at least one
okay and then um
the last uh thing we talked about at the
end of last lecture was that
um
the
image of
a bounded closed and bounded interval by
a continuous function
is again
a closed and bounded interval
where e corresponds to
the absolute max of f and f corresponds
so that i shouldn't call this f since we
already have f being used
and g
corresponds to
let's make it d
corresponds to the absolute min of f
okay so this uh
is what we proved uh
last time is that f of
if f is continuous then
there exists
e d
and r
such that the range
of this closed and bounded interval is
again
a closed and bounded interval okay so f
is very well behaved
on closed and bounded intervals
and we'll see another way in which
continuous functions are well behaved on
a closed and bounded interval in just a
second
um now
you know a simple application of
the balzano immediate value intermediate
value theorem
is um the following
really it's an application of that
theorem that i labeled the bisection
method but uh
let's uh
you know chalk that up to the bolzando
intermediate value theorem
which is the following that
if f of x
is
any odd
polynomial
then
f has
at least one
real root
okay
so any odd polynomial has at least one
real root so by the fundamental theorem
of algebra every polynomial has exactly
n roots n corresponding to the degree of
the polynomial but these roots can be
complex valued okay
uh but for odd polynomials there must be
at least one real root and this is a
consequence of the bolzano interview
intermediate value theorem but instead
of proving this theorem in its full
generality let me just give you kind of
a representative example
so let's take
f of x equals x to the
[Music]
minus x to the
20 20
plus
i don't know what's today
i think the 25th or 24th i don't know 10
x
minus
300.
okay
so what's the point
as long as i plug in a big enough x
um
i will
this will swamp everything
here
okay
so for example if i stick in
f of
you know 100 000
i leave it to you to check that this is
positive right because
this will be a hundred thousand to the
2020 minus a hundred thousand to the
uh
or 20 21
and then plus this which will be
positive minus 300 this doesn't matter
so what really matters is this big guy
or this guy with the largest
power will
swamp all the other ones and eventually
be positive if i stick in a large enough
positive value
and likewise
in fact for this guy
if i stick in a negative
value
then i get something very big but now
with the minus sign which will again
swamp all these earlier guys in fact i
don't have to choose minus a hundred
thousand if i just stick in zero i will
get minus 300 which will be negative but
you can check that if i stick in minus
100 000 this will still be negative
thus by the intermediate value theorem
there exists a c in
100 000
so that
f of c equals 0 right because 0 is
something in between
f evaluated at these two endpoints
all right
but again
you
can prove this and the idea is the same
is that as long as you go far enough uh
out and positive then the polynomial
will be
um
positive if the coefficient out of front
is positive
and if you go far enough out negative
then
um you'll get something that's uh
that's negative and then you apply the
intermediate value theorem to to be able
to
find a root
okay
now of course uh one other thing we did
with the statement of the mid max
theorem was
you know can we
drop
um any of the assumptions on
you know this theorem
and you know you can see that the
example is no
so
the question is if f
from a closed and bounded interval
is not
continuous
and let's say
f of 0 is less than 0 f of a
if b is bigger than 0 then
does there exist
c
a b such that
f c equals zero
okay
let me put that question mark at the end
all right
and it's easy to come up with an example
of a function
that is not continuous that satisfies
these conclusions and there does not
exist a point in between so that f of c
equals zero simplest being
i'll just draw
a picture let's go from
uh
minus one
one
two okay
so then the function
is
f of x equals
x minus 1 and
this is for x not equal to
uh one and
you know let's make it uh let's make it
a half there
so this function looks like
half
there
okay so there's no value there's no c in
between
uh
so
x is between 0 and 2. so you see f of 0
is equal to -1 that's negative f of 2 is
equal to 1 it's positive but there
exists no c in between
so that f of c equals 0. okay
so
what's the point i'm making
we really do need this hypothesis
that the function is continuous for this
theorem to be true
okay if you drop that hypothesis then
the theorem is no longer true
okay
okay so um
now we're going to move on to a new
concept
called uniform continuity
and before i do this i'm going to bring
up or i'm going to rewrite
the definition of continuity
so
this is a old definition but i want to
highlight a specific
aspect of it so this is uh me writing
the definition of a continuous function
again
so
a function f
from a set s to r
is
continuous
so we said that means it's continuous at
every point
meaning
if
for all c and s
it's continuous at c which means for all
epsilon positive there exists a delta
now this delta
and
you know we saw this in examples uh
that we did proving continuity
this usually depends on
epsilon and c the point
where i'm looking at
such that
for all x and s
x minus c less than delta implies that
f of x minus f of c
is less than epsilon
okay
so
just to
so this is again a bit of review but i
just want to show you that in general
you know when we
verify that a function is continuous on
a set we have to show it's continuous at
every point in the set and that means
for every epsilon there exists a delta
but this delta can depend on usually it
depends on epsilon but it can also
depend on the point c which is where
we're checking continuity at okay
so
for simple example let's take
f of x equals 1 over x
on the interval 0 1 open interval 0 1.
okay so i claim
f of x
equals 1 over x is continuous
so proof
we have to show that for every c
in 0 1 for all epsilon there exists that
so let's see
b and 0 1.
let
epsilon be positive
now choose
again i mean i'm not since this is kind
of review i'm not going to go through
the process of of really the thinking
behind choosing this
this delta i mean there's you know
calculations you do off to the side to
try and get this delta but let's choose
delta to be
the minimum of
c over 2
and
c squared over 2
times epsilon
so what you notice
what i want to again emphasize is this
delta depends on c the point we're
looking at and epsilon okay
so i claim this delta works
suppose x is in
0 1 and x minus c
is less than delta
okay
then
absolute value of x this is equal to the
f
this is
by the triangle inequality
so let me write it this way
um
c
absolute value
is equal to
c minus x plus x which is less than or
equal to
c minus x
plus x
which is less than delta
which is less than or equal to the
minimum of these two so it's certainly
mess less than or equal to c over two
plus x and now you know c and uh
x these are in zero one so they're all
positive
and therefore i get that
let's go to the next board
[Applause]
so if i subtract the c over to the other
the c over 2 over to the other side i
get that
c over 2 is less than
x all right so this is as long as x is
in 0 1 and x minus c is less than delta
okay this should not be a shock all
right
here's 0
c
c over 2
3 c over 2.
okay
and so if x is in this interval it's
certainly bounded away by c over two
okay
um or if x is in here then x is
certainly bigger than c over two
all right and now we look at
f of x minus f of c
this is equal to 1 over x minus 1 over c
equals
c minus x over x times c
which is less than delta over x times c
and
because this is a
okay
and now x is less than x is bigger than
c over 2 so if i take 1 over that
i get
1 over x is less than 2 over c so this
is less than or equal to 2 delta
over c squared and delta is the minimum
of now c over 2 and c squared over 2
times epsilon
so this is less than or equal to 2 over
c squared times c squared over two
epsilon equals epsilon okay
so i just went through the proof of
continuity for one over x which uh
you know using
better machinery we could have proven
but uh
i did this to to highlight this point
that's showing
continuity of one over x on zero one
that in showing that you know
this delta that you are choosing depends
kind of on the point you're looking at
all right so
now i want to make a
so you know what the definition of
continuity says is for all c
for all epsilon you can find a delta
uh depending on epsilon and c
now uniform continuity
removes that necessity of delta
depending on c
okay and i'm going to make a
possibly bad analogy in just a minute
but first let me write down the
definition of uniform continuity
let s be a subset of r
f going from s to r
we say f
is
uniformly
continuous
on s
if
we're all epsilon positive
there exists a delta depending only on
epsilon
such that
for all xc and s
with x minus c less than delta
we get that f of x
minus f of c
is less than epsilon
okay so
you know a function being continuous
means that for all epsilon you can find
a delta depending on one of these points
depending on c so that if i have this
then i have this
uniform continuity says you can find a
delta
that works across the board okay um
so i'm gonna make a try and make a an
analogy that hopefully i don't have to
cut out of this lecture
um
but it's a bit like this
let's take a trip down memory lane
and imagine being at a party
so you know everybody's in a party and
let's
say that everybody can hear
their ears work just about the same
and the goal is you know to try and
understand each other's conversations
try try and hear each other's
conversations
now in order for
um
you know
me to hear this person's conversation
depending on how loud they talk i have
to be
close enough to be able to hear them
you know and this changes from person to
person in the room maybe i have to i can
stand a foot away from
this person over here maybe this person
over here is a
low talker and i have to be almost up in
their face to be able to hear them maybe
that person just whispers and i have to
be almost nose to nose to be able to
hear them you know that's a bit like a
function being
continuous okay
you know
the
threshold of hearing
what they're saying is the epsilon and i
have to change my delta depending on
what point i'm at so that i can hear
them
now uniform continuity
is kind of like
everybody's um
more or less speaking around the same uh
level
speaking at the same loudness all right
so i just can be within say one foot of
everybody and be able to understand them
i go to this person if i'm within one
foot i can hear them well
if i go to this person i hear and
within one foot i can hear them well and
and so on all right so that's
kind of the difference between you know
or at least a loose analogy of the
difference between continuity and
uniform continuity
all right um
so this is a
you know
reasonably interesting definition so we
should see examples and negate it
um first off
you know i
you should be able to convince yourself
that a function that's uniformly
continuous is actually continuous i'm
not going to write that the proof of
that down it follows essentially
straight from the definition
um
but let's look at uh
let's look at a function which is
um
uniformly consent continuous so
the function f of x
equals x squared
on the interval 0 1.
is uniformly continuous
okay
so what's the proof
i want you to notice i'm going to use
kind of in a
very
essential way that we're on this closed
and bounded interval
so we need to show that for every
epsilon there exists a delta
so that no matter what two points
so if you'd like here's a picture that
goes
along with this
so that if i look at
any two points that are close to each
other less than delta
their
function's value
is
within epsilon and so let's say i'm on
interval a b but not just this point i
could go over here to two other
points that are within delta of each
other and if i look at
the function evaluated
at the two points
and
then the difference between these two
guys is also less than epsilon
okay
so i can move
through the party and as long as i'm
close enough
within you know a uniform distance to
somebody i can i can hear them just fine
all right so
[Applause]
what a nice trip down memory lane when
we could be around other people um
so let's show this function is uniformly
continuous let epsilon be positive
choose delta to be
epsilon over 2.
now you see this delta just depends on
epsilon
okay
then if
x and c are in 0 1
and
x minus c is less than delta
then
if i compute
the difference x squared minus c squared
this is
i can write as x plus c times x minus c
and now i use the triangle inequality
this is less than or equal to
x minus c
now these guys are in zero one so their
absolute value is always bounded by one
so this is less than or equal to one
plus one
and then x minus c is bounded by delta
which equals two times delta and delta
is chosen to be epsilon over two so i
get epsilon
all right now again how would you choose
delta so it looks like i just chose this
delta out of nowhere in practice how do
you choose delta
this is the computation you do you take
x squared minus c squared split it
you have this
you can estimate with what you know
above by
2 here times delta
so how do you choose delta so that two
times delta is
say equal to epsilon you choose delta to
be epsilon over two
okay
all right so um
let's negate this definition and then
look at one over x once again
and check to see if it's uniformly
continuous we'll show it's not
so the negation
f from s to r
is not uniformly
continuous
so
i saw a little bit of the new borat
movie that came out so i almost wanted
to say
f is uniformly continuous not but i
didn't
it's not uniformly continuous
if and now you negate the rest of the
definition
if there exists some bad epsilon
such that no matter what delta you
choose
there exists some bad x and c
and s
such that
they're close to each other
but the values are not
bigger than or equal to
okay
so
let's
revisit one over x
this is not
uniformly continuous
on
the open interval 0 1. so you see that
this function is continuous but it's not
uniformly continuous all right
so we just proved that a minute ago that
it's continuous so let me now
give you the proof that this function is
not uniformly continuous and what's the
idea
behind this
here's one
okay this is not to scale but there's
one
as well and
one over x
you know
shoots up to plus infinity as x
approaches zero
right
and
so what uniform continuity says is that
if i take any two points in the interval
that are close to each other then the
outputs have to be close to each other
all right
continuity remember says if i fix a
point
then as long as i'm close to that point
the outputs will be close to each other
uniform says no matter what two points
you choose as long as they're close
together
the outputs will be close together in a
controlled way now if i take
two points
very close to each other here very close
to zero
they can be you know pretty close to
each other
but their differences
i mean their values
can be
quite large
even though
the difference between the
arguments are small the values can be
quite large just because 1 over x
shoots up so
let's quantify this i have to tell you
what the bad epsilon knot is
choose epsilon not equals 2. now any
epsilon naught
will work just fine
let uh
delta be positive so now we have to find
x and c
n s uh within distance delta to each
other
that
whose values different differ very uh by
at least two
so let's choose
c to be
the minimum of
delta and a half
and i'm going to choose x to be
c over 2.
okay
so just ignoring this half for a minute
c is equal to delta x is equal to delta
over 2
and then 1 over c minus one over x is
going to be two over delta and if delta
is very small that's certainly bigger
than or equal to two but i had to throw
in this one half here because i chose
epsilon not to be two
all right and delta's arbitrary
so
then we see that x minus c
this equals c over two
which is certainly less than or equal to
since c is the minimum of delta and one
over half is less than delta over two
which is less than delta
and if we compute
one over x minus one over c
this is uh
remember x is c over two so this one
over x is two over c
so
1 over c
right
and now
from c
being less than or equal to
1 over half i get that 1 over c is going
to be bigger than or equal to 2.
all right
and that's the end of the proof
right so we see that even though
these two uh
these two arguments are very close to
each other the outputs are in fact you
know
separated
by some fixed distance
at least two
but we could actually make it you know
bigger than three bigger than four
whatever you like all right
[Applause]
okay
and i'm not going to go over this
example
but in fact
i'll leave it to you or maybe i'll put
it on the assignment f of x equals x
squared
is not
uniformly continuous on
r so we should we saw that it's
uniformly continuous on the closed
interval 0 1
but it's not uniformly continuous on
all of r okay
the reason being again kind of because
you know x squared is starting to get
big so i can take two things close to
each other stick it into x squared and
their outputs could be you know very
different from each other
i didn't write out the proof of this one
so we're going to go a little bit by
a little bit by the seat of our pants
so we want to show this is not uniformly
continuous so
i think epsilon 0 equals 1 is going to
work just fine
that delta b positive
and the idea
is we want to choose
x to be
some number
let's call it a
plus
well
c will be some number
and
c equals
some number
x equals c
plus
delta over two okay so this is kind of
scratch work off to the side and let's
see if we can somehow choose c
so that um so first off
um
you know x minus c
will be c over 2
will be delta over 2 which is less than
delta
and now let's see
if we can
choose c
so that
x squared minus c squared
is
bigger than or equal to one
okay
so
c is is
kind of the thing that we get to play
with here
i mean this is how it actually goes
uh if you're one to you know figure out
the proof before you write it down you
know the scratch work to the side
all right so
choose c so that this now
let's start off with
the thing that we're trying to bound
from below and start computing some
stuff
this is equal to x plus c and c will be
positive okay so
um this will be
c and x will be positive so x plus c
times x minus c
now x plus c
will be
2c plus
delta over two
x minus c will be
so so far all of these things are
equality
and we get this is equal to
2c
plus
so
delta
is 2c plus delta squared over two
and here we're going to choose c
positive right so we're trying to show
it's not uniformly continuous on r
so we just need to find a value of c and
a value of x
so that they're within delta distance to
each other but their outputs are bigger
than or equal to one
so
so far if c is just something positive x
is c plus delta over two then they're
close
their difference however is going to be
just by this computation
equal to
2c plus delta over 2 times delta over 2
squared
now delta squared over 2 is always
non-negative so it's certainly bigger
than or equal to delta times c
and
now remember we wanted this thing to be
bigger than or equal to one right now we
have it's bigger than or equal to delta
c
so let's choose c to be
one over delta
okay
and
let's see that that works
choose
c to be 1 over delta
x to be
1 over delta so c plus
delta over 2.
then these two values are close
x minus c equals
delta over 2
is less than delta
and
x squared minus c squared
equals x plus c
times x
minus c
x plus c as we did a minute ago is going
to be
2 over delta plus delta over 2 that's x
plus c
x minus c is equal to delta over 2.
which equals 1 plus
delta squared over 4 which is bigger
than or equal to 1
our bad epsilon okay so
f of x equals x squared is not uniformly
continuous on r
even though it is uniformly continuous
on this closed and bounded interval
okay
so
um
you know uniform continuity is really a
relationship between a function
and
you know the the domain on which it's
defined
okay
but okay so this is uh kind of to wrap
up
our theme of
continuous functions
and how they're behaved on closed and
bounded intervals and we see here that
you know uniform continuity is a much
stronger notion than
continuity as i've said i mean you can
easily prove from the definition that if
a function is uniformly continuous on s
then it's continuous on s
all right
now
and we've seen that in general
the reverse inclusion does not hold so
let me just write this up
as a remark
in general
f
uniformly continuous
implies that
f is
continuous this just follows from the
definition okay this is not difficult to
show
but
the converse does not hold
okay
as we've just seen right we have two
examples here f of x equals one over x
on the open interval zero one which is
continuous but it's not uniformly
continuous and then we have the function
f of x equals x squared which is
not uniformly continuous on r but in
fact it is uniformly continuous on this
closed and bounded interval zero one
this example here though is in fact the
rule
that if i'm looking at
a continuous function
or a function on my closed and bounded
interval then in fact
these two notions are equivalent so
that's the the following theorem
let f
be a function from
a to b to r
so a closed and bounded interval now not
just an arbitrary set
then
f is
continuous
on a b meaning it's continuous at every
point
if and only if
f is
uniformly continuous
on a b okay
and the necessity of being working on a
closed and bounded interval
um is seen again by these uh examples we
by this example we had here of f of x
equals one over x and f of x equals x
squared on r and zero one okay
but as long as we're looking on a closed
and bounded interval
uh continuous is equivalent to uniform
continuity
all right now this is also not the
sharpest thing you can say
um
in fact
what you can say is that if i replace
this with what's called a compact set uh
which i may put in the assignment i may
not then this statement is still true
and that's in some sense the sharpest uh
statement but
i think this is interesting enough
to just work on a closed and bounded
interval
okay
so
let's prove this
so again this direction
uh
i should say
i leave this to you as an exercise
uniform continuity implying uh
continuity and leave it to you
and i will do
more difficult one
and we'll use use kind of a
you know philosophy like we did
in the previous lecture where we used
the definition of continuity or this
theorem about
uh continuity in terms of sequences and
also the bolzano virus cross
here
okay good we still have the negation of
the definition of uniform continuity
and that's what we'll need
all right so we're going to prove
f continuous implies uniformly
continuous and we're going to do this by
contradiction so
suppose f
is continuous on a b but not uniformly
continuous
all right and then we're gonna
break the universe
some way
all right
which shows that our assumption that f
is not uniformly continuous
does not hold
okay
so we use
this negation of the definition of
uniform continuity
which says for
that there exists a delta zero so let me
write this out
i'm just going to rewrite this here then
there exists a delta 0 such that for all
delta positive there exists x
c
and
a b
which depend on delta
such that x minus c is less than delta
and
f of x minus f of c
it's greater than or equal to epsilon
not
okay
now
this holds for
every delta you can find the x and c so
that x minus c is less than delta so f
of x minus and f of x minus f of c is
greater than or equal to epsilon naught
so let's choose delta to be one over n
for each natural number n
and for all natural numbers n
there exists
xn
cn and a b
such that so this is a statement now
with delta equals one over n
x n minus c n is less than one over n
and
f of x sub n
minus f of
c sub n
is bigger than or equal to epsilon zero
okay
now
i have two sequences um
here
and
they're bounded because they're in this
closed and bounded interval
so i can pass to a subsequence of one of
them to start
by
the bolzano virustras theorem
not bc horizontal virus truss i think
that's
probably somewhere else in the lecture
or the previous i wrote bz but i meant
bw
by bolzano virustras
there exists
a subsequence
x n sub k
of x sub n
and
x
and a b
such that
limit as k goes to infinity of x of n
sub k
equals uh
x so
my balzona virustras from any bounded
sequence we can find a convergent
subsequence and because this subsequence
is always between a and b
the limit x will be between a and b all
right
now
if i look at
since
the subsequence c in sub k is
bounded between
a and
b
so
i have a subsequence of x of n sub k and
i then obtain a subsequence of the c sub
n's okay by just picking these integers
to be the same
all right
and
so now that subsequence is
of the c sub n that's still uh you know
they're all coming from a b so that's
bounded by a b
so it's bounded so by
bolzano virustras applied now to this
subsequence
there exists
a subsequence
c sub n sub k sub j
j of
c sub n sub k
okay
and
an element c in a b
such that the limit as
j goes to infinity of c sub n sub k sub
j
equals c okay so
you know i found a subsequence of the x
of n's
and
now i look at kind of a corresponding
subsequence of the c sub n's where now
this subsequence the n sub k's
are
coming from the n sub k is chosen for
this subsequence
that's still a bounded sequence so by
bolzano virustrals i can take a
subsequence of that
and an element c
so that i have convergence
okay
all right
so now
let me just uh summarize
in summary
let's call these
so in summary
the sequence is
x sub n sub k sub j so now this is even
a subsequence of x of n sub k
and c sub n sub k sub j
these are
subsequences of
the original sequences x of n
and c sub n
and
there's this x and c
a b
such that
the limit
as
j goes to infinity of x of n sub j
equals x
and
limit as j goes to infinity of c sub n
sub
k j
h j equals c
okay
now i claim x equals c
now
um
0 is certainly bigger than or equal to x
of n sub k sub j minus
c sub n sub k sub j
which is less than or equal to by
how we've defined these sequences
is less than or equal to one over n sub
k sub j
all right
and as j goes to infinity so first off
uh
by
the definition of uh subsequences
um j is always bigger than or equal to n
sub case or n sub k sub j is always
bigger than or equal to j so this is
always less than or equal to one over j
this is just a consequence of how
subsequences are defined okay you always
have to move to the right after you've
made a choice of
a
entry in the sequence that you're going
to take as an element of your
subsequence
so 0 is bounded
bounds this from below
and it's bounded above by 1 over j which
converges to 0. so
the middle thing has to converge to zero
by the squeeze theorem
but these two things that converges to x
this converges to c
and so
the absolute value of x minus c equals 0
and therefore
x equals c
now we're almost home free
thus limit
as j goes to infinity of x sub n sub k
sub j
equals c
and limit as
j goes to infinity
c sub n sub k sub j
equals
c
[Applause]
all right now where's uh where's the
kicker
[Applause]
this
so these are subsequences of x sub n and
c sub n
[Applause]
but each of those sequences is
converging to a number c so by the
theorem about continuity
since f is
continuous
at c this implies that 0
equals the limit as j goes to infinity
of
f of x sub n sub
so
write it this way f of c minus f of c
equals
limit j goes to infinity of
f of n sub
n sub
c sub n sub k sub j
which is bigger than or equal to epsilon
zero right all of these are supposed to
be bigger than or equal to some fixed
epsilon zero which is positive
and but we've just shown it's equal to
zero
and that's the contradiction
plus f is
uniformly continuous
on
a b
okay
all right so that concludes um
you know what we'll say about continuity
and as you'll note kind of going forward
we're going to cover topics faster
that's just because we have more
machinery to to work with you know at
the start it was very slow going just
because
one
it's the start of your first proof-based
class so i'm going to go slow
and two we didn't have much to work with
we just had the real numbers are
an ordered field with the least upper
bound property but now we've covered
sequences
continuity we know more and it'll be
easier to to
prove new things and also
you know hopefully familiarity with
proof is getting with proofs
is getting better so that
my arguments can be a little bit shorter
and not so
so involved
so
we're moving on to something now
uh
this is supposed to be about calculus
we've covered limits uh continuity the
next uh
big topic
has to be differentiability so
this is a new chapter
about the derivative
so let's um
let me first
give you the precise definition so
um
first off
i'll be saying uh
okay
let i be
an interval
f goes from i to r
and c an element of i
now when i say an interval i don't mean
it has to be closed and bounded like
ones we've been working on i don't mean
it has to be open you know it doesn't
have to be a bounded interval like from
zero to one it could be zero to infinity
uh it can include the endpoints except
of course infinity
but i think you know what i mean and i
don't have to write all this out for for
what exactly an interval is so let i be
an interval and f be a function from i
to r
and c uh a point of i
um
so
first off
you know convince yourselves of this but
i think this should be pretty clear
for an interval
every point in the interval is a cluster
point of the interval
okay
this is not
um
you know too difficult to prove but uh
and i will not require you to prove it
but i'm just saying this because i'm
about to define a limit at c so
uh it had better be a cluster point of
of um you know a set
containing um
of a set
that this limit is defined using so
of i
take away c
and if you don't like this statement
just forget i even wrote you know wrote
it and we'll continue on
you say f
is differentiable
at c
so this is the new
bit of terminology
if the limit
limit x goes to c
f of x minus
f of c over x minus c
exists
okay if this limit exists we say the
function's differentiable at z
and
we write
we use a notation
f prime f apostrophe c
for this limit
okay
f is differentiable
every point
of the interval i we get a new function
this function f prime of c which we
denote by
we denote
the
function that's the derivative of f as f
prime or df dx
okay
okay so the simplest guys that are
differentiable are of course polynomials
i think this is one of the first things
you learned back in calculus um
and
you know
i'm not going to go through what this is
supposed to represent you know this from
calculus
the best way to say what this number
represents is the instantaneous rate of
change of the function f at this point
how is f
changing at that point
in the sense of increasing decreasing
and so on
all right
or you if you like you interpret this as
being the slope of the line that is
perfectly tangent to the curve
uh to the graph of the function f but uh
um
you know what does that mean to be
tangent to the graph of a function you
know so that takes a bit of explaining
so i'm not going to get into what the
actual
interpretation of this number is
i think you have a pretty good idea of
what that is we're just going to start
proving some properties of it
so
the simplest example of a function which
is differentiable
is that of a monomial
so
f of x equals
x to the n
let's put let's put even a number in
there
so let uh
let's write it this way
but alpha being r
and b a natural number
zero
then
function f of x equals alpha times x to
the n
is
differentiable um
so i should have said here as well if a
function is differentiable at every
point where it's defined
uh
or if a function is differentiable at
every point in its domain i then we just
say the function's differentiable
so then this function this monomial is
differentiable and
for all c f prime of c equals
n times alpha x the n minus 1.
okay
c
so let's give a proof of that
and we'll use
this
kind of simple formula
so let's take a look at
x minus c times this kind of
weird looking sum to
x
n minus 1 minus j
c to the
j
so this is equal to
multiply the x through i get sum from
j equals 0 to
n minus 1
x to the
n minus j
c to the j minus
and i'm not going to use j again in the
sum when i carry this c through i'm
going to use l
sum from l equals 0
to
n minus 1
x to the
n minus i'll put it this way j plus 1
c to the j plus 1
or
l
okay
and now i'm going to make a change of
variables in the second sum
and let j equals l plus 1.
okay
so in that case when l equals 0 j starts
at 1
when l hits n minus 1 j equals n so this
equals the sum from j equals 0
n minus 1 x n minus j c to the j minus
sum
j equals
to n
x
n minus j c to the j
so it's the same
terms in the sum except starting at
different places so what doesn't get
killed here is the j equals 0 term
because this one starts at j equals 1
this one ends at n
and so it kills the n minus 1 term so
the only thing that survives from this
sum is the j equals 0 term x to the n
minus 0 c to the 0 minus
and now from here
everything gets killed except the n term
so x to the n minus n c to the n
equals x to the n minus c to the
right so
this
is therefore equal to
this okay
so we use this to compute this limit
so then
f prime of c is equal to the limit
as x goes to c
of x to the n
alpha times x to the n times alpha times
c to the n
where x minus c now alpha is just a
number it can pop out
x to the n minus c to the n divided by x
minus c is this thing divided by x minus
c so this is equal to alpha
times the limit as x goes to c
of sum from
j equals 0
to n minus 1
x to the n minus 1 minus j
c to the j
now this is just a polynomial in x
okay polynomials are continuous
functions so the limit as x goes to c is
just you plug in c to x and so this
equals alpha
times sum from j equals 0 to n minus 1.
c to the n minus 1
minus j times j equals
so c to the n minus 1 minus j times c to
the j gives me c to the n minus 1.
i'm summing in j
there's no j here so that just pops out
times the sum
j equals 0
n minus 1
and that's just there's n of d
times 1 so this is just n
and that's the proof
okay so i'm sure you saw that at some
point
next time we'll continue with
we'll give an example of a function
which is not differentiable at a point
of course
i think you probably already know this f
of x equals the absolute value of x
if there's time at some point
i'll go over an example of a function
which
was very surprising to people at one
point so now that we have
differentiability and continuity on the
board
for a long time
some long since dead people
believed that if you have a continuous
function
any continuous function then there has
to be at least one point where it's
differentiable
okay
there must be at least one point where
it's differentiable
and people tried to prove that for a
long time and they couldn't because it's
false
virus ross who is again kind of the
godfather of everything we're doing
came up with a
whole class of examples of functions
that are continuous
but are differentiable nowhere okay
they're not differentiable at a single
point
all right
and
perhaps depending on time
uh we'll go over this example
and
i think i'll stop there
you